\chapter{Introduction}

In the applied sciences mathematical models are developed which attempt to
describe the world around us, often these models require input in the form of
some observed quantity e.g. an object's mass. Unfortantely while every care is
taken to ensure measured quantities are as accurate as possible there is always
some margin of error to any observation.

This begs the question, how does uncertainty in the measurement affect the
outcome of the model? That is precisely the question that we address in this
project. We consider the model of steady-state heat distribution in a given
domain $D$ as described by the Partial Differential Equation (PDE) commonly
known as \textit{Laplace's Equation}.

There are many approaches one can take to model uncertainty, perhaps one of the
most striaghtforward methods would be to use \textit{Monte Carlo Methods} to
generate a large number of samples for the uncertain values and use them in
solving a large number of systems where you can then aggregate the results.
While effective the large number of sytems involved can lead to analyses being
computationally expensive.

Instead we will look at using the \textit{Generalised Polynomial Chaos}, a
recent method building on various results including the fact that members from
the \textit{Askey Scheme} of orthogonal polynomials can be used as a basis to
span various probability spaces. This then allows us to approximate various
stochastic processes using truncated expansions in terms of these polynomials
and when coupled with the \textit{Finite Element Method} construct a large,
deterministic linear system of equations which we can easily solve.
Specifically we will be following the process outlined in
\cite{general-poly-chaos}

First in Section \ref{sec:definitions} we state some definitions for the function
spaces which will be commonly used throughout the project. Then in Chapters
\ref{chap:oned-deterministic} and \ref{chap:twod-deterministic} we explore the
deterministic cases of this equation in both one and two spatial dimensions
with simple domains. We employ the Finite Element Method to construct a linear
system of equations which we can use to obtain a numerical approximation to the
solution.

Then we consider the stochastic cases of this problem, first in one spatial
dimension (Chapter \ref{chap:oned-stochastic}) and then in two spatial
dimensions (Chapter \ref{chap:twod-stochastic}). Using the Generalised
Polynomail Chaos we extend the linear systems constructed in the previous
chapters to model the effects of the random processes with a fully
deterministic set of equations which we solve numerically.

\section{Function Spaces}\label{sec:definitions}

\begin{definition}\label{def:L2-D}
    $L^2(D)$ Space

    Let $D$ be an open subset of $\mathbb{R}^n$ the vector space $L^2(D)$ is
    given by:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:L2-D}
        L^2(D) = \{f: D \rightarrow \mathbb{R}\ |\ f \text{ is measureable, }
                    \int_D|f|^2\, d\v{x} < \infty\}
    \end{equation}

    Any two elements $f,g$ of $L^2(D)$ are still considered equal if they
    differ only in a set $A \subset D$ which has measure zero w.r.t the
    Lebesque measure i.e. $f = g$ `almost everywhere'. This notion of equality
    defines an equivalence class $f \sim g$ of functions where each class has a
    unique continuous representative.

    Furthermore $L^2(D)$ can be made into a \textit{Hilbert Space} when paired
    with the following inner product:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:L2-D-inner-product}
        \langle f,g \rangle = \int_Df(\v{x})g(\v{x})\, d\v{x}
    \end{equation}

    which induces the following norm:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:L2-D-norm}
        ||f||_2 := \langle f, f\rangle^{\frac{1}{2}}
                 = \left(\int_D|f|^2\, d\v{x}\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}
    \end{equation}

\end{definition}

\begin{definition}\label{def:L2-Omega}
    $L^2(\Omega)$ Space

    Given a probability space $(\Omega, \Sigma, P)$ we define $L^2(\Omega)$ in
    a similar manner to Definition \ref{def:L2-D} but this time with respect to
    the probability measure $P$:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:L2-Omega}
        L^2(\Omega) = \{f: \Omega \rightarrow \mathbb{R}\ |\
            f \text{ is } P \text{ measureable and }
            \int_\Omega|f|^2\, dP < \infty \}
    \end{equation}

    Again equality is defined in terms of an equivalence class:

    \[
        f \sim g \Rightarrow f = g \text{ a.e. w.r.t probability measure } P
    \]

    and can be made into a \textit{Hilbert Space} when paried with the
    following inner product:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:L2-Omega-inner-prod}
        \langle f, g \rangle = \int_\Omega f(\omega)g(\omega)\, dP
    \end{equation}

    which induces the following norm:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:L2-Omega-norm}
        ||f||_2 := \langle f, f\rangle^{\frac{1}{2}}
                 = \left(\int_\Omega|f|^2\, dP\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}
    \end{equation}
\end{definition}

\begin{definition}\label{def:oned-H1-D}
    Sobolev Space $H^1(D)$ in one dimension

    Let $D \subset \mathbb{R}$ be open, then the Sobolev Space $H^1(D)$ in one
    spatial dimension is given by:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:oned-H1-D}
        H^1(D) = \{f: D \rightarrow \mathbb{R}\ |\ f' \text{ exists and }
                    f' \in L^2(D)\}
    \end{equation}

    where in this case the derivative is meant in the weak sense i.e. there
    exists some $v$ such that:

    \[
        \int_D v\varphi\, dx = -\int_Df\varphi'\, dx
    \]

    holds for all smooth functions $\varphi$ defined on $D$ with compact
    support. $H^1(D)$ can be made into a \textit{Hilbert Space} with the
    following inner product:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:oned-H1-D-inner-prod}
        \langle f, g\rangle = \langle f', g' \rangle_{L^2(D)}
    \end{equation}

    which induces the following norm:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:oned-H1-D-norm}
        ||f||_{H^1(D)} := ||f'||_{L^2(D)}
    \end{equation}
\end{definition}

\begin{definition}\label{def:twod-H1-D}
    Sobolev Space $H^1(D)$ in two dimensions

    Let $D \subset \mathbb{R}^2$ be open, then the Sobolev Space $H^1(D)$ in
    two spatial dimensions is given by:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:twod-H1-D}
        H^1(D) = \{f: D \rightarrow \mathbb{R}\ |\
            D^\alpha f \text{ exists and } D^\alpha f \in L^1(D),
            \forall |\alpha| \leq 1 \}
    \end{equation}

    where $\alpha = (\alpha_1, \alpha_2)$, $\alpha_1, \alpha_2 \in \mathbb{N}$
    is a multi-index which we use to define the differential operator $D^\alpha$:

    \[
        D^\alpha = \frac{\partial^{\alpha_1 + \alpha_2}}
        {\partial^{\alpha_1}x_1\partial^{\alpha_2}x_2}
    \]

    when equipped with the following inner product:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:twod-H1-D-inner-product}
        \langle f, g\rangle =
            \sum_{|\alpha| \leq 1}\langle D^\alpha f, D^\alpha g \rangle_{L^2(D)}
    \end{equation}

    $H^1(D)$ can be made into a \textit{Hilbert Space} with the following
    induced norm:

    \begin{equation}\label{eq:twod-H1-D-norm}
        ||f||_{H^1(D)} =
         \left(\sum_{|\alpha| \leq 1}||D^\alpha f||_{L^2(D)}\right)^\frac{1}{2}
    \end{equation}
\end{definition}
